---
layout: post
title: "Panama: An Unexpected Country"
author: Clark Hickman 
location: Panama City, Panamá, PA
date: 2026-06-12
category: panama 
post_description: We weren't sure if we would like Panama. Nothing against the country, but we were ready to be done with the heat of Central America and more focused on the logistics of shipping our car to South America; in fact, we had already set our shipping date before even entering the country, limiting our time to less than three weeks. Of course, Panama became one of our favorites yet! We absolutely loved the landscapes, climate, and people around Volcán Barú. We did not do the rest of the country justice, only getting to spend a couple of hours hiking and swimming along our route to Panama City. While we are sad that we had to leave, we are excited for the next stage of our adventure!
sendero:
  - url: /assets/images/2026-06-12-ranger.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/2026-06-12-ranger.jpg
  - url: /assets/images/2026-06-12-quetzaltrail.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/2026-06-12-quetzaltrail.jpg
boquete:
  - url: /assets/images/2026-06-12-boquetepark.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/2026-06-12-boquetepark.jpg
  - url: /assets/images/2026-06-12-boquetefood.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/2026-06-12-boquetefood.jpg
  - url: /assets/images/2026-06-12-waterfall.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/2026-06-12-waterfall.jpg
cerroriver:
  - url: /assets/images/2026-06-12-cerro1.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/2026-06-12-cerro1.jpg
  - url: /assets/images/2026-06-12-canyonriver.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/2026-06-12-canyonriver.jpg
---
We weren't sure if we would like Panama. Nothing against the country, but the general trend during our travels throughout Central America was the need to <a href="/el%20salvador/roughweek/">escape the tropical heat</a> by <a href="/honduras/calmweek/">fleeing to the mountains</a>. A quick check of the map told us this wouldn't be much of an option. And so, before even crossing into the country, we limited our time in Panama to less than three weeks by agreeing to a shipping date to send our home to South America. Surely that would be more than enough time to explore the country without getting too burnt out in the heat.

Unfortunately for us, Panama became one of our favorite countries yet! Or, at least, western Panama did; we hardly got to the rest of the isthmus because we enjoyed our time in the Chiriquí region so much. To be fair to our initial concerns, the rest of Panama is quite hot (not so ideal for living in a dark car), but the regions around Volcán Barú were among our favorites in all of Central America. This meant that we did not get to any of the islands, beaches, or lakes that the country is famous for. And we skipped the entire region of the country east of the capital: one famous for its lakes, natural beauty, and indigenous craftworks. As always, there are so many amazing places to explore that -- even with all of our travel time -- we hardly scratch the surface.

While we can lament all that we did not see, the places we did travel to were very neat! Our time in Panama started at some remote hot springs west of the large volcano. Contrary to previous "<em>aguas calientes</em>" that were more <em>templado</em> than truly <em>caliente</em>, these springs were legitimately hot, with temperatures approaching those of a hot tub! Just as we reached our boiling point, we'd rush over to the cool river and (almost literally) hear the steam coming off our bodies. Given that there wasn't a whole lot else to do in the area (the road was so poor it took us 50 minutes to travel the 7 km to get there), we pretty much only hiked and relaxed in the waters for several days. 

{% include figure.html popup=true image_path="/assets/images/2026-06-12-hotspring.jpg" %}
<figcaption>Our campsite at the hotsprings, with a cool river just behind the car!</figcaption>

Given the difficulty of getting there, we saw very few people, but those who did make the trek were often happy to converse with us to hear about our travels. In this way, we received several recommendations for the nearby town of Volcán, where we drank great local coffee and enjoyed wonderful hospitality from the local Catholic school, where they let us park and charge our batteries for the night because we had connected with the wife of one of the office workers while at the hot springs. 

With our groceries, water, and batteries replenished, we made the two-plus-hour drive to the town of Boquete on the other side of the volcano. Only about twelve kilometers apart as the crow flies, we later learned that no road directly connects the two because environmentalists blocked a proposed road north around the volcano, in part to protect precious habitat for quetzals and other cloud-forest species. We learned this because we ended up walking part of the route of the proposed road in our search of the long-tailed bird. We never did see one (<a href="/panama/birdwatching/">that would come a day later!</a>), but the hike was still pretty spectacular; definitely worth the extra drive-time to preserve the natural beauty. When we returned to our home, the wonderful park rangers invited us to share a meal with them (we had parked outside their station), and we chatted for a while about our travels and their jobs and families. 

{% include gallery.html id="sendero" %}
<figcaption> The rangers who warmly welcomed us for meals and conversations (left) and the Sendero Quetzal; where we saw no quetzals... (right). </figcaption>

After a short waterfall hike the next morning, we drove back into town with plans to maybe spend a couple of days there. Eight days later, we reluctantly hit the road only because we had to be in Panama City (a 300-mile trek) in two days. In addition to extremely pleasant weather, Boquete had all of our favorite things: several beautiful riverside parks, a nice public library, and great coffee shops. Big enough that the grocery store carried a variety of interesting foods. Small enough that we could walk everywhere and develop favorite spots to work and to relax. It can be difficult to write about these kinds of places; we don't exactly do a whole lot there except live our lives, happy for the break from travel and the chance to work on our own projects. But Boquete definitely ranks near the top of the towns we loved in Central America.

{% include gallery.html id="boquete" %}
<figcaption> Moments from Boquete: the park we spent mornings finding our peace before starting the day (left), a delicious <em>hojaldras</em>, huevos rancheros style (middle), and a waterfall hike where we saw a quetzal! </figcaption>

After leaving Boquete, we made a mad dash to Panama City in order to arrive in time to start the paperwork for the shipping process. We made the most of it. An early morning hike up <em>Cerro La Silla</em> to ensure our legs were properly stretched. An afternoon stop at <em>Los Cajones de Chame</em> to go for a short swim in the beautiful canyon. Even major traffic in the last hours of the drive could not deter our mood; we simply pulled over to the side of the road to shower and make dinner (this did not actually clear the traffic, but it did improve our demeanors considerably). We arrived in Panama City well after dark, grateful to our container buddies (the couple whose car would share a shipping container with ours) for sending us a parking spot that we could pull into for the night.

{% include figure.html popup=true image_path="/assets/images/2026-06-12-cerro.jpg" %}
{% include gallery.html id="cerroriver" %}
<figcaption> Hiking at Cerro La Silla (top and left) and swimming at Los Cajones de Chame (bottom right).</figcaption>

We were moderately underwhelmed by our week in Panama City. Undoubtedly, this is, in part, because we spent more than half of it completing the necessary paperwork and van modifications needed to send it off and then turning around and doing the same for ourselves. We did get to take a couple of hours to see the canal locks; the engineering feat is amazing, but, if you've seen one lock, you've seen them all. We did not care for the historical center, where we stayed for a couple of nights once our car was on its way to South America. Light on history but heavy on expensive restaurants and tourists, it was not our cup of tea. Still, we took advantage of our first hotel room in months to shower (and shower, and shower some more!) and watch plenty of the World Cup in between planning the logistics to leave the continent and reunite with the Stinkbug. We'll see you on the other side!
