---
layout: post
title: 
author: Clark Hickman
location: Volcán Pacaya, Escuintla, GT
date: 2025-02-01
categories: guatemala
post_description: 
gallery:
  - url: /assets/images/2025-11-14-MorningCacti.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/2025-11-14-MorningCacti.jpg
    alt: "Morning Sunrise"
    title: "Morning Sunrise"
  - url: /assets/images/2025-11-14-DogView.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/2025-11-14-DogView.jpg
    alt: "Our way back down"
    title: "Our way back down"
  - url: /assets/images/2025-11-14-GuideDog.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/2025-11-14-GuideDog.jpg
    alt: "Mountain Guide Dog"
    title: "Mountain Guide Dog"
---

M returned to her home to find a rock the size of a mango on the floor. Looking up, she saw the corresponding hole in her roof where the rock had entered, ejected from Volcán Pacaya in its latest eruption. Just two kilometers separated her home from the volcano, plenty close enough to put her in the danger zone. Thankfully, she and her family had evacuated days before, as CONRED - the Guatemalan government's disaster mitigation agency - had ordered an evacuation of the area following increased volcanic activity in March 2014 <a href="https://www.bbc.com/news/world-latin-america-26409946#:~:text=A%20volcano%20has%20erupted%20in,Increased%20activity%20in%20Guatemalan%20volcano.">(BBC,2014)</a>. Early warning systems and government agencies like CONRED have significantly reduced mortality from natural disasters over the past several decades, a trend we can hope to continue as some disasters themselves may get less predictable in a changing climate.

\addpic{pic of pacaya toward the peak, I'm thinking the one where it's green on one side and the lava field and peak are on the other}

Over a decade later, M relayed this story to us as she guided our group of three on a hike of Pacaya, which has been largely quiet since it's last period of increased activity in 2021 <a href="https://volcano.si.edu/volcano.cfm?vn=342110">(Smithsonian, 2021)</a>. Still the heat escaping from the fumaroles that dot the landscape is enough to "roast" marshmellows, a gambit that draws in thousands of tourists a year. (As a self-proclaimed marshmellow roasting expert, it's really an only uninspring melted marshmellow, although the uniqueness of the landscape makes up for the poorness of the resulting s'more). M told us that the results are better at times of higher activity and, if it's hot enough, a local business makes good money making and selling "Volcano pizzas." As scientists interested in the intersection between natural and man-made systems, we appreciated our guide and she listened to our questions asked in broken Spanish and relayed her experience living so close to a source of potential disaste, a source that uncoincidentally also generates her source of income.

\addpic{hiking with our guide, roasting marshmellows}

Thanks in part to the evacuation warnings - generated as the volcanic activity had picked up - no one died as a direct result from the pyroclastic flow. It helped too, that Pacaya has regular enough eruptions (including three major ones this century in 2010, 2014, and 2021) that folks have built their homes away from the direction where the ejected magma generally spills. Still, each eruption brings significant economic hardship, from the damages caused to property and livestock to a reduction in tourism as authorities wait to ensure the area is safe to return to. The eruption in 2014 even grounded flights in Guatemala City - 30 miles away - due to the significant amount of ash that reached the area <a href="https://www.wired.com/2014/03/guatemalas-pacaya-enters-new-phase-eruptions/">(Wired, 2014)</a>.

\addpic{expansive lava flow from pacaya}

Even more pernicious, the health effects from the residual gases of the eruptions caused respiratory illness and even death among some of the local residents, according to M. Individually, this is challenging to prove definitely, both due to difficulty pinpointing cause and effect in a system as complex as the human body and because studying such events requires a dedicated and long-lasting research effort. Still, M is probably spot on, as nearly every disaster has long-lasting impacts that generally harm those who are most vulnerable <a href="https://www.undrr.org/news/sendai-framework-6th-anniversary-time-recognize-there-no-such-thing-natural-disaster-were">(United Nations, 2021)</a>.

Volcanoes, of course, are far from the only systems the Mother Nature throws at us that pose a danger to human lives and infrastructure. From hurricanes to landslides, flooding to wildfires, heatwaves to earthquakes, we live on a dynamic planet that constantly disrupts even the best-planned systems that we may put in place. As each system has different causal relationships, each system needs different datasets and methods to make accurate predictions and provide warnings early enough to warn folks before disaster strikes. Of course, this is neither easy nor cheap - the UN recently estimated it would take over $3 billion to develop early warning systems for everyone on Earth (NPR, 2026). In terms of global GDP though, this is hardly a drop in the bucket (truly, it would be less than half a cent per person). Better yet, we have proof that it works, in large part because the past decades have seen drastic reductions in lives lost during natural disasters thanks to the warning systems that have been implemented in that time (WMO, 2022; Our World in Data, 2024).....


Current efforts (npr article https://www.npr.org/2026/02/10/nx-s1-5544181/extreme-weather-warnings-international), earthquake predictions, landslide and flooding modeling. 

Hurricane is probably the most famous (perfect for the news cycle, is there an On the Media quote on this?)

Some of this can be made more difficult by climate change, as weather systems may diverge from those studied in the past.

We will always be subject to some of the worst that Mother Nature can throw at us. Adaptability and resilience are key. Rebirth will happen too as long as people have enough time to recover 

\addpic{joya de ceren}

Regardless of how good we can get at predictions and warnings, folks need to heed the biggest warning and work to combat climate change. Work to combat poverty because natural disasters are only disasters because of how they impact humans.






 


