---
layout: post
title: "Utz Ki'il My Chopping"
author: Vrinda Desai
location: San Andrés Ceballos, Sacatepéquez, GT 
date: 2026-01-26
category: guatemala
---

This week was weird. After three months on the road, almost exactly, and spending nearly 24 hours together every day, Clark and I “separated” for about a week. Let me expand on this. We were doing a workaway at a traditional Guatemalan restaurant named <em>Utz Ki'il</em> (meaning ‘good flavor’ in the K’iche-Mayan language). The deal was only for me as you live at the restaurant, which has a small living space that would not be suitable for Arya due to its size, proximity to the restaurant (literally in the back), and presence of the cutest kitten imaginable. We figured Clark would park somewhere in town and I would see him sometime during the day. Turns out this town had little street parking that would have been suitable for a car of our size. Thankfully, Jacqueline, the restaurant owner and chef, had a small parking lot up a big hill a 30-minute walk away. Short story long, Clark and Arya ended up parking there and through this arrangement, Clark was able to come and help out at the restaurant for the day shift before hiking back up to be with Arya in the evenings. \add?{In some sense, this mirrored our last year in NC, when I would leave for work weeks in Asheville while Clark stayed in Raleigh. The regularity of a job and commute was also a nice change-up from the van life routine and movement, as we were able to become intimately familiar with the small town and its residents and rhythms.}

\addpics{fitting the van into the parking space, tito!!}

During this week, we chopped tons of <em>cebollas</em> (onions), <em>zanahorias</em> (carrots), <em>ejotes</em> (green beans), <em>papas</em> (potatoes), and <em>tomates</em> (tomatoes, duh) in tiny rhombus like shapes. Clark, who always chops his vegetables too bulky, would sometimes have to redo his chopping to get them to the right size \add?{(something I have been talking him for years, but whatever…)}. I also struggled to get it just right. The chopping was intense but needed and these vegetables were used in almost all the dishes. The two main traditional dishes cooked that week were <em>estofado</em> and <em>sopa de pepian</em>. The interesting thing, though, is that while in Mexico, they use spices to flavor their dishes and Mexican dishes are actually known to be <em>picante</em>; this was not true in Guatemala. Yes, we used dried chiles, but that was about it in terms of spice. Spicing was not a thing at all. Salt and oregano were the only two spices to be found in the entire restaurant. But man oh man, the salsas one could make with the freshest ingredients and nothing else. Let's just say, I watched and I learned, and I am ready to make my own salsas now, albeit maybe with a bit more kick!

\add?{could add story about indian cooking, but not necessary}

\addpic{v in the kitchen}