---
layout: post
title: Running Through Nicaragua
author: Clark Hickman
location: Ometepe Island, Rivas, NI
date: 2026-03-21
category: Nicaragua 
post_description: We spent less than two weeks in Nicaragua thanks to border rules, but immensely enjoyed our time there, however short. With colonial towns (León and Granada), lakes (Xiloá, Apoyo, and Cocibolca), volcanoes (Masaya), and an island (Ometepe), the country had a bit of everything. Despite our somewhat rushed timeline, we took time to appreciate the nature, the lifestyle, and, most of all, the people.
---

The countries of Central America have a long shared history that often doesn't neatly overlap with modern borders, from common Mayan ancestry to being consolidated by the Spanish into a single territory to post-colonial government rule that generally served the interests of the (usually American or American-adjacent) wealthy class. With this shared history and similar cultures, four of the countries - Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua - created the C-4, allowing citizens and tourists alike an easier time traversing the area, similar to the European Schengen Zone (although our experience has been more difficult here, but this may be because of the dog and the car). However, this came with a caveat: we only had 90 days to cross these four large and interesting countries before our time ran out! After spending a longer time in Guatemala and El Salvador and deciding to take a week (and some travel days) to <a href="/honduras/scubadiving/">scuba dive in Honduras</a>, we had less than two weeks to spend in Nicaragua, a country we were both looking forward to!

We started in León, one of the old colonial cities from Spanish times. Not much to say here, as we largely rested after a long drive the day before from Tegucigalpa - the capital at the center of Honduras - all the way to León, with a 2-1/2 hour border stop for fun (again, not the ease with which one generally travels Europe). Plus, the city was very hot, which is not fun in a black car, and meant we did not get to go volcano boarding - sledding on volcanic scree - because we could not leave Arya alone in there for an extended period of time. We did enjoy the pretty town square one evening along with delicious shawarma, but if we were to give recommendations for Nicaragua, León comes lower on the list.

\addpic{on top of the church roof}

After our day of rest, we continued our journey southeast, spending a couple of hours cooling off in the waters of Laguna Xiloá before driving over to Volcán Masaya for sunset. The volcano is internationally famous as being one of only eight volcanoes in the world to host an active ‘lava lake’ - where molten lava is persistently visible at the surface of the crater. Driving up just after sunset, we marveled at the glow of the lava as it backlit the volcanic gases rising out of the crater. Our only disappointment was that we could not see the lava itself; for safety reasons, the park keeps all tourists on one side of the crater and just far enough from the rim that we could not look straight down into the lake. (We later learned from a local that the entire crater rim trail used to be open for hiking, but slope instability led the rangers to close much of this some time ago. Sad, but very understandable.) The other highlight from this portion of our adventure is that we picked up our first hitchhiker! A is a traveler and influencer from Brazil who needed a ride up to the crater from the park entrance; looking friendly enough, we spent a pleasant two hours swapping travel stories and tips and exploring the area with him before dropping him back at his hostel that night.

\addpic{masaya, pic with A?}

The next morning we continued onward to Granada, another Spanish colonial town on the shores of Lago Cocibolca. Maybe because we were better rested, perhaps because the lake moderated the temperature, and almost certainly because we enjoyed better company, we took to Granada much more than we had to León. During a morning walking tour, we met S from Belize; we quickly took to each other and, before we knew it, ended up sharing lunch and a lovely afternoon at her complex where we discussed working while traveling (S helps organize events to encourage and aid folks over 50 who want to become digital nomads) and life goals. One of the great joys of this journey has been sharing it with such a wide variety of folks, each of whom are infinitely interesting and complex and joyous in their own ways. We can only aspire to be the same.

\addpic{one or two with Siobhan}

Still looking to beat the heat, we maintained a distinct focus on finding cool (literally and figuratively) bodies of water. Our next stop was Laguna Apoyo, where we worked on some van repairs and ran down to the lake whenever we needed to lower our body temperature. We met our first howler monkeys here, and the troop and Arya had a “shouting” match for ten minutes or so before each side calmed down. The monkeys had the last laugh though, as they woke us at 4 in the morning with several loud calls and the sound of waste raining onto our van… Thanks, Arya.

\addpic?{not sure we have great ones from here, no worries if not}

Our last, longest, and favorite spot in Nicaragua was on Ometepe Island, where we enjoyed gorgeous sunsets, fresh mangoes plucked straight from the tree, and a scooter adventure. A couple of volcanoes rising straight out of Lago Cocibolca, Ometepe offered the island lifestyle while being close enough to land that we could ferry our car over for a reasonable price. Naturally, we enjoyed the water the most, especially playing fetch with Arya and watching her bound over the waves. In addition to mostly relaxing, we completed a moderate waterfall hike that was ruined by an overly domesticated raccoon at the falls (it was more curious of Arya than afraid, so we had to leave because we were worried it would attack her when she tried to “play” with it). We also rented a scooter for a day to explore more of the island: we did not let an initial mishap involving loose gravel keep us from making the most of the sunlight and driving around much of the island (although ironically we found that we had already camped at some of the best spots). Perhaps the only thing keeping us from staying even longer was that by Sunday, we were on Day 89 of our 90-day visa!

\addpic{any special ones from Ometepe, definitely sunsets, maybe any good scooter ones, raccoon?, Arya in the waves, etc}

Our time in Nicaragua was too short, but we made sure to pack it full of adventure, learning how best to travel in the extended heat (find water), making friends, and still finding time to take things slow when we needed to. We certainly did not do the country justice, but we enjoyed what we could and could definitely see ourselves returning if it is in our future.