---
layout: post
title: "Fuego"
author: Vrinda Desai
location: place
date: 2025-01-01
category: guatemala
---

Oh man. I cannot believe I am writing this. This was a dream come true. A year of hard work and struggles realized into one. big. red. lava. eruption. 

The hike up was the hardest hike we have yet done. With our backpacking gear and a steep 15% (average) gradient (more specifically: 4,000 feet of elevation in 3 miles), there were times when I thought we were not going to make it in time. To be clear, many people do this hike but without the 20lb pack of all their gear carried on their back. The typical way to do Acatenango is through a group where the comapny has cabanas, cooked meals, and bathrooms with a great view of Fuego and you only have to bring yourself. This was not of interest to us, so we went the hard way.

We got to, not the top of Acatenango but around the peak and towards Fuego, right as it was getting dark. Full of exhaustion and despair as the campground that other backpackers had used was another mile along the trail and from what we initially could see, we were surronded by cabanas all around and not much in terms of a flat space to set up a tent. 

Right then, Fuego erupts. This huge burst of lava spews out. Bright reds. You could see the droplets roll down the hill before solidifying into lava rocks. It was incredible. It was the moment. The moment where everything from the past year had come together for this. I felt it in my bones. And in my heart. 

I cannot describe this moment, but just know that these pictures and this blog does not do it enough justice. 

The rest of the night was spent waiting and watching many times over as Fuego erupted. Small ones. Big ones. Loud ones. Smoky ones. It was hard to even try to sleep in fear of missing an eruption. Eventually, around 2 or 3 in the morning, Fuego slows down, allowing us to rest for our hike down. 

