---
layout: post
title: You Say Goodbye, and I Say Hello
author: Clark Hickman
location: Cartagena, Bolivar, CO
date: 2026-06-20
category: colombia 
post_description: summary for social media
stage: first draft writing
---
The largest logistical hurdle of our Pan-American journey has been completed! It was (unsuprisngly) extremely nervewracking to load our home into a shipping container and trust that we would see it all again a week later. Not to mention all of the bureaucratic paperwork needed to complete the process. Plus, even after the van was taken care of, we still needed to get ourselves -- and Arya! -- across the border as well! While the entire journey was not without flaws, things largely went as expected; patience was the defining virtue of our two weeks. Best of all, we made some incredible friends along the way, connections that made the stress more than worth it!

Not ones for idle time, we jumped straight in to the shipping process by showing up in Panama City less than twelve hours \addlink{} before we needed to start the paperwork for our van. In what would become a common theme, we were grateful to our container buddies -- S and P from Switzerland -- for helping us find a parking spot next to them at such a late hour. The next morning, the two cars drove over to the police station to receive the first of many pieces of paper than would need to be kept track of and passed along to the next department in line. Other than an extremely confusing route just to cross the highway (it took us 15 minutes after we made a wrong turn on a cloverleaf), we successfully passed along the initial police paper to the next secretary and received the official document granting us permission to ship our car out of the country. In the meantime, we enjoyed the AC and food court of the nearby dog-friendly mall.

\addpic{mall?}

One step down, we then drove across the city to meet up with The Overland Embassy, the company that helped organize the shipping by arranging the necessary port agents and giving (mostly) clear instructions that made the entire process more straightforward. At their campground, we were able to prep our car for shipping by packing up many of our items, finishing our perishable food, and, most importantly, determining how we were going to fit the car into the container. We knew that, with our high roof, solar panels, and roof fan, our van was slightly taller than the entrance of a standard shipping container. Using a laser level, Overland Embassy proved that if we took enough air out of our massive tires and removed the roof fan, we could fit the van without needing to remove the solar panels. This confirmed our own measurements and research, but was still a relief to hear the experts assure us this was a fairly common procedure for folks in our situation. Roof fan removed, food all eaten, and our necessary belongings packed, we set our alarms for 4 to make the early morning drive up to the port of Colón where we would say goodbye to the Stinkbug for the week...

\addpics{any from OE?}

And we almost missed our time! We later learned that everyone else in the campground heard our alarm except us; they assumed that we must have been getting ready inside the home. All of the long days, stressful paperwork, and the early hour caught up with us. A little after 430, Vrinda bolted upright and we got to scrambling to finish our final packing. With a home on wheels, it's possible to do this while driving! We got to our meetup with ten minutes to spare...