---
layout: post
title: You Say Goodbye, and I Say Hello
author: Clark Hickman
location: Cartagena, Bolivar, CO
date: 2026-06-22
category: colombia 
post_description: summary for social media
stage: first draft writing
---
The largest logistical hurdle of our Pan-American journey has been completed! It was (unsuprisngly) extremely nervewracking to load our home into a shipping container and trust that we would see it all again a week later. Not to mention all of the bureaucratic paperwork needed to complete the process. Plus, even after the van was taken care of, we still needed to get ourselves -- and Arya! -- across the border as well. While the entire journey was not without flaws, things largely went as expected; patience was the defining virtue of our two weeks. Best of all, we made some incredible friends along the way, connections that made the stress more than worth it!

Not ones for idle time, we jumped straight in to the shipping process by showing up in Panama City less than twelve hours \addlink{} before we needed to start the paperwork for our van. In what would become a common theme, we were grateful to our container buddies -- S and P from Switzerland -- for helping us find a parking spot next to them at such a late hour. The next morning, the two cars drove over to the police station to receive the first of many pieces of paper than would need to be kept track of and passed along to the next department in line. Other than an extremely confusing route just to cross the highway (it took us 15 minutes after we made a wrong turn on a cloverleaf), we successfully passed along the initial police paper to the next secretary and received the official document granting us permission to ship our car out of the country. In the meantime, we enjoyed the AC and food court of the nearby dog-friendly mall.

\addpic{mall?}

One step down, we then drove across the city to meet up with The Overland Embassy, the company that helped organize the shipping by arranging the necessary port agents and giving (mostly) clear instructions that made the entire process more straightforward. At their campground, we were able to prep our car for shipping by packing up many of our items, finishing our perishable food, and, most importantly, determining how we were going to fit the car into the container. We knew that, with our high roof, solar panels, and roof fan, our van was slightly taller than the entrance of a standard shipping container. Using a laser level, Overland Embassy proved that if we took enough air out of our massive tires and removed the roof fan, we could fit the van without needing to remove the solar panels. This confirmed our own measurements and research, but was still a relief to hear the experts assure us this was a fairly common procedure for folks in our situation. Roof fan removed, food all eaten, and our necessary belongings packed, we set our alarms for 4 to make the early morning drive up to the port of Colón where we would say goodbye to the Stinkbug for the week...

\addpics{roof van gone?, any from OE?}

And we almost missed our time! We later learned that everyone else in the campground heard our alarm except us; they assumed that we must have been getting ready inside the home. All of the long days, stressful paperwork, and the early hour caught up with us. A little after 430, Vrinda bolted upright and we got to scrambling to finish our final packing. Thankfully, with a home on wheels, it's possible (although not recommended) to do this while driving, and we got to our meetup with ten minutes to spare. After months of worrying about the fit of our van, the loading process itself was quite straightforward, taking less than 15 minutes from the time our van started to roll onto the truck to parking it inside the shipping container. As we had practiced, we needed to remove quite a bit of air from our tires (down to 10 PSI), but the car fit snuggly inside the container afterwards and was secured by the port workers. We were a little emotional as the container doors closed, saying goodbye to the home that had served us so faithfully over the previous eight months.

\addpics{loading}

Our home gone, we got our ride back to Panama City and needed to turn right around and complete the process for getting ourselves to Colombia! It had been recommended we didn't book flights until the van was loaded in case their were delays; easy enough for people, but a little more work when traveling with a dog. Thankfully, several airlines allow emotional support animals on trips to Colombia. The only caveat was that we needed to purchase an additional seat for Arya because she exceeded the weight requirements to qualify as a lap dog (although she will tell you otherwise). Tickets booked, we found a cheap hotel near the historical peninsula to finally get some rest (and showers!) after completing the first half of our shipping journey. The next two days were pretty uneventful by comparison, finishing the last paperwork to export Arya and walking around the historical center (mediocore at best, but we did enjoy a meal with our container buddies). By far the majority of our time was spent resting, showering, and watching the World Cup in the AC of our room; a luxury that made the separation from our home a little more bearable.

\addpics{any from panama city, hotel}

Airline rules required us to take the first flight of the day with the dog. With a potentially longer check-in process as well, we arrived at the airport a little after 430. (We made sure to set multiple alarms this time!). At that hour, the airport was largely empty. A little grumbly because we could have slept in a little longer, we made the most of the space to get some additional training in with Arya so she might be on her best behavior that morning. 40 minutes later, we were beginning to get a bit nervous that no agents had shown up to help us check in with our flight now only two hours away. We soon learned that we actually needed to check in at the other terminal, and then return to this one for our flight! We jumped on the next bus, arriving to find the other terminal horrifyingly busy. Following an anxious wait in line, we were eventually checked in with no problems and time to trek back to the first terminal where we would catch our flight, extra grateful that our early arrival prevented more stress for time. The flight to Colmbia was short, and Arya got many approving looks from the other passengers and crew (although she was sad that she wasn't allowed on the seats).

\addpics{flight}

Our first stop in South America was Cartagena, the port city where our van would arrive in several days. As with Panama City, the heat restricted much exploration of the area during the day, but we made full use of the kitchen in our Airbnb and enjoyed early morning and nighttime walks around the neighborhood. By far the highlight of our stay in the city came on our second night when, while I was taking the dog out for a "quick" nighttime bathroom break, I was accosted by a quick-talking and energetic dog walker. Registering my confusion, she (M) quickly switched to English, eager to hear about what brought us to Cartagena and to give suggestions for our stay there. An hour later, we had walked nearly the entire neigborhood; we learned we had been neighbors in North Carolina before the pandemic (she was completing a Master's at Duke while we started our program at State), we both liked great vegetarian food, dogs, and travel, and that M connections just about everywhere, including a quantum physicist in the States. Arriving home, Vrinda let me know how concerned she was that I had been gone for so long until I informed her that I had just met her best friend in Colombia, knowing the two of them would hit it off. Sure enough, on a dog walk two days later, we (this time with Vrinda) spent another two hours getting the "official/unofficial" tour of the neighborhood, complete with an introduction to Colombian street food.

\addpics{cartagena, monica?}

other highlights of cartagena, old town, soccer match, rooming with Suli and Phil

process of getting the car out...

final weekend with elections, monica, finally starting our South America journey